In the next two lessons, we're going to
learn how to write data
to a text file and then read data back in
from a text file.
We're gonna start out in this lesson
learning how to write data to a file,
so that in the next lesson we'll have some
data to read in and manipulate.
So let's get started.
We're gonna create a program, we'll call
it writefile.py.
And we'll use that to write our data to a
file.
The first step is to create a file
variable, or a file object, that
associates a physical file on the hard
drive with the variable in our program.
So we do that by using the function open,
where we provide the name of a file.
We're gonna call this one text.text.
T-E-X-T.T-E-X-T.
So, that's our file name and then we also
have to provide a
second argument W, which says to open the
file to write data to it.
So once we've issued this command, or
executed this statement, then we then have
a file object outFile which is associated
with a file on the disk.
This function open creates a new file that
we name, and if a file exists with the
same name, then it deletes it and creates
a new file anyway with the same name.
So be very careful when you use the open
function to write data.
The next step is to simply write data to
the file, for that we have a
function write, and then we just simply
provide
the data that we wanna write to the file.
I'm just gonna write some nonsensical data
here.
Notice I'm specifically giving a new line
command so that
each line will exist on its own, so that
this is
line 1 will be on the first line of the
file
and this is line 2 will be on the second
line.
We'll stop there and then when we're
finished, we can close
the file and in fact we have to close the
file.
The reason for that is because when you
issue a write
function, Python will simply write the
data to a buffer into memory.
And only upon closing the file, is the
data actually written to the disk.
So you have to always execute a close
function on
a file object to actually get data written
to the file.
So let's save and run the program.
[BLANK_AUDIO].
And then to see if our file's there, we'll
type the command, type text.text, and
there's our data.
This is line 1, and this is line 2.
So now that we've done that, let's look at
another example.
We'll comment out this first example.
Where we're gonna prompt the user to enter
some numeric data, let's
say some grades, and we're gonna store
those grades in a file.
So we start out by opening the file that
we wanna write data to, we'll call it
grades.text.
Again, we have to provide the W argument
to
opening it for writing, and then we're
gonna create a
variable, we're gonna set it to a value
and
we're gonna say, while grade is not equal
to Q.
Now, I'm using q cuz I want that to be
the command where the letter that the user
enters to quit.
You might wonder where ending grades is
numbers, but
we're gonna use q as the value to quit.
Understand that we're going to be writing
this data as strings.
And in the next lesson when we read the
data back into a program, then
we'll convert it from string to int or
float, however we choose to do that.
So we're gonna prompt the user, enter a
grade, q
to quit, then we'll get the grade using
raw input.
Then we will write the grade to our file
and notice that we can catenate
a new line to that, so that each grade
will exist on its own line.
That will just make it easier to read the
data back in.
And that should be all we have to do, so
at this point,
we can close the file and then our data
should be written out.
So let's exit and Save.
Let's clear the screen here.
[BLANK_AUDIO].
And let's call it right file, so we'll
enter a couple of grades
we'll do 5, enter 84, 77, 63, then we'll
do 100.
Then we'll enter a q, and then it quits.
So then we can type it out.
Now, notice that the q was written to the
file, which is not what we wanted.
So let's go back to the program,
and the way to solve this problem will be
to
take our initial prompt, place it outside
the while, write the
data first, we're gonna move it up to
here, like so,
then ask the user to enter data again at
the bottom.
And now this way when the user enters q,
right
here, then the test will happen up here
before the write.
And that way we won't have a queue in the
file.
So let's Exit and Save, and run it again.
Let's clear the screen.
Find our program.
There it is.
So we'll do 100, 93, 87, 72, 66 and
then a q to quit.
Type out the file, and there we go.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
It's very important that you watch the
order of how
statements are executed when writing data
to a file and collecting
input from the user to make sure that a
sentinel
value such as Q, is not accidentally
written to the file.
Now that we've seen how to write data to a
file, we're ready to move on
to the next lesson, where we're going to
learn how to read data in from the file.